domestic pressure is increasing on
President Joe Biden to stop weapons
being sent from the US to Israel key
Ally and former house Speaker ncy Pelosi
is among those who have signed a letter
from dozens of congressional Democrats
the letter says this in light of the
recent strike against Aid workers and
the ever worsening humanitarian crisis
we believe it is unjustifiable to
approve these weapons transfers now it
goes on to say if it is found that the
strike violated us or international law
those responsible must be held
accountable okay for more on this we're
going to go now to shab renzi who is in
Washington DC for us and as we know for
some time Biden has resisted these calls
to stop weapons uh shipments to Israel
is there any sign that this letter is
actually going to make any difference at
this
point not yet John Kirby at the White
House on Friday said two things related
to this letter I suppose is that one the
letter is calling for a US investigator
into what happened to those World
Central Kitchen a Aid workers Kirby said
there's no plans for any kind of us
investigation and there's no plans for
uh any curtailment of of weapons uh of
weapons transfers at at the moment so
yeah I mean the problem with this letter
is yeah this is all very well and it's
significant Nancy Pelosi I mean really
there was a sharp intake of breath and
we saw her name on on this letter the
idea that she would even suggest
conditionality for for for arms shment
even though that is actually the US that
is the US law the Ley the so-called Ley
law which means that you can't ship
weapons to someone who's abusing human
rights nonetheless having her name was
significant given the power of the
Israeli Lobby and so on but there's no
kind of or else in this letter or else
what so they've got their their names on
the line now they've signed that this
letter but they're not saying okay if
you don't do that then we're going to do
this I mean one way of testing how
significant this was this is is if were
a number of these these these these
members of Cong Congress did actually
vote for further arms shipments for
Israel so if they withhold their vote
that would be something but now we know
that the Biden Administration is
bypassing Congress to send weapons to
Israel it's using accounting techniques
it's it's it's shipping weapons up to
the threshold that Congress has to
approve more weapon tripment so it's
unlikely that they will be tested now um
so yeah it's it's it's unclear yet
whether this is performative clearly as
you say they are feeling pressure from
their local
constituents but what are they going to
do about it other than write a letter
that's what we have to see indeed and
sheab regarding the phone call between
Biden and Netanyahu how has that been
received uh within the US has there been
any reaction or Fallout from that as
Biden continues to I guess outwardly put
more pressure on
Netanyahu I think the White House got
the headlines that wanted that you know
Biden is now is now putting the pressure
and clearly Israel has said you know
it's going to allow some shipments in I
mean the problem for Biden there was
that just proved to everyone just how
weak he's been or whether I mean they
raised more questions because it
suggested that Biden could have done
this at any point that there was no need
for children to die of starvation Biden
could have could have done this earlier
so that was some sort of blowback then
of course we have the the Israeli the
pro-israeli lobbies here saying you know
you're putting too much pressure on
Israel so of course we're seeing the
walk backs now we're seeing the letters
being sent to Qatar and Egypt by the
White House is just look we're we're
pressuring all sides in the in the in
the negotiation
and then the most interesting story I
think was even the Israelis were a bit
confused by some of the headlines and
what Biden said on that phone call the
question was was Biden delinking the
issue of the hostage release from some
sort of immediate temporary ceasefire
even the Israelis were confused by what
Biden was saying and immediately the
next day that was all walked back by the
White House saying no no no no no no we
only talk we're only talking about a
ceasefire in the context of the release
of the hostages if that had been delink
that would be very very significant it
turns out that isn't what Biden was
saying much to the relief of the
Israelis who had to ask for
clarification themselves okay thank you
so much shab shab ranzi there for us in
Washington
DC okay well eler senior political
analyst M bash joins us again thanks
very much for being here moan as we
heard uh there from shihab he said that
there are no consequences to that letter
what do you make of that aspect of it
even though clearly there is pressure
ramping up on Joe Biden that's it I
mean it's nuanced it's getting a bit
complicated for the Biden Administration
that doesn't mean uh this will
automatically lead to a decisive action
on the part of the uh American president
but pressure is building up uh pressure
is building up internationally
regionally but also domestically in the
United States and I think uh just
looking at some of the uh you know
signatories and and looking at how
things are ramping up in in Washington
My Philosophy has always been if you
want to know how or where things are
going follow the
opportunists and
clearly things are changing in
Washington and in the United States and
why that's why a lot of people are
jumping ship or changing directions
because they understand that uh at least
in the Democratic party and among
Independents there is an Israel fatigue
there's a Netanyahu fatigue for sure the
number I have been uh uh looking at
close
is not the 33,000 people uh who died in
Gaza and not the 20 plus thousand
children women who were killed in Gaza
although this is the most important of
all numbers but the Biden Administration
is looking at number
47,000 and that is the number of
Wisconson Democrats who went to the
primaries they actually in a cold day
got off went to the polling station and
voted uncommitted
M this is part of the anti-biden
campaign that says we're going to put
the president on notice their goal was
20,000 uncommitted they got
47,000 now Wisconsin like Michigan that
had 100,000 uncommitted voters like Ohio
like Florida like North Carolina
Pennsylvania these are what you call
swing States this is where President
Biden won in in 2020 with a very small
margin in Wisconsin it was 20,000 now
you have 47,000 uncommitted so the
pressure is building up in the Democrat
in the Democratic party and in uh in the
United States and so Biden has to do one
of two things either he has to maintain
the usual Keeping Up Appearances of
doing something without really doing
anything meaning the ice cream
diplomacy or even the phone call
diplomacy or he gets serious and does
some serious diplomacy because we've
seen just from the phone call that
things are changing somewhat in Israel
and on the part of the Israeli
government so imagine if it's real
weight that's being put in Israel okay
so there's the option that he could get
serious or can get more serious what
would that look like what would he need
to say and I guess more importantly what
would he need to do it's some of the
things that uh for example shahab has
mentioned that Democrats are asking for
he needs to do them for example example
he says no more weapons we are freezing
all shipments of weapons even the things
that we agreed to before or this week we
are not shipping no more ammunitions no
more 2,000 PB bombs no more f35s right
so at least you can start with the
military then you can go into other
forms of AIDS then you can simply put
Israel on notice that we the United
States cannot be complicit in war crimes
or in genocide or what have you and this
is an election year I don't have time
for you and for your games stop lying to
us so when we put pressure on you before
you said no no it's technicality that's
why we cannot get the aid in no it's not
technicality it's political and it's
racist and it's inhumane to starve the
people in Gaza it's a war crime it's a
genocidal War crime to starve the people
in Gaza so now within 48 Hours we've
seen that the the the the amount of
trucks are multiplying that are going to
Gaza so in fact there was no technical
problem there was a political problem so
you can see just by a mere phone call
and and by the way it's it's fascinating
right the past 72 hours I think 48 Hours
we've all been hanging our hats on the
damn phone call and it's just a phone
call right imagine if he he Biden
convenes his his cabinet and takes some
serious decisions and really puts Israel
in order says if you don't do 1 2 3 4
we're going to do 1 2 3 4 now we judging
from the phone call that the that the
sky doesn't fall in Washington if an
American Administration uses its
leverage with Israel in fact it becomes
more popular at home right so clearly
there's now a precedent just in recent
memory whereby the American president
can use his his influence his power his
leverage on the Israeli government and
changed things in Gaza it's unfortunate
that he didn't for the past six months
but but as one as one as one newspaper
Ed editorialized it's maybe a bit too
late but it doesn't have to be too
little yeah America can use some serious
pressure to get some serious results
because enough is enough right in Gaza
okay we'll have to leave it there but
thanks as always M ma Bashar senior
political Isa thank you